The Concurrent Computing Landscape
==================================

-   Multiple tasks that need to be done
    -   Execute one at the time on a single processor (road)
    -   Execute in parallel on multiple processors (lanes in a road)
    -   Execute on distributed processors (separate roads)

The Essence of Concurrent Programming
-------------------------------------

-   A concurrent program contains two or more processes that work
    together to perform a task.
-   The processes work together by *communicating* with each other.
    -   The communication is programmed using shared variables or
        message passing.
-   Processes need to *synchronize* with each other
    -   Mutual exclusion
        -   Ensuring critical sections of statements do not execute at
            the same time
    -   Condition synchronization
        -   Delaying a process until a given condition is true

Hardware Architectures
----------------------

Summarizes key attributes of modern computer architectures

### Processors and Caches

-   A modern single-processor machine contains several components
    -   A central processing unit (CPU)
    -   Primary memory
    -   One or more levels of cache memory
    -   Secondary (disk) storage
    -   Variety of peripheral devices

### Shared-Memory Multiprocessors

-   The processors and memory modules are connected by means of an
    *interconnection network*
    -   The processors share the primary memory, but each processor has
        its own cache memory
-   *Memory consistency models*:
    -   *Sequential consistency*: Guarantees that memory updates will
        appear to occur in some sequential order, and that every
        processor will see the same order
        -   The strongest model
    -   *Processor consistency*: Ensures that the writes by each
        processor will occur in memory in the order they are issued by
        the processor, but writes issued by different processors might
        be seen in different orders by other processors.
        -   Weaker model
    -   *Release consistency*: Ensures only that the primary memory is
        updated at programmer-specified synchronization points.
        -   Even weaker model
-   Memory consistency presents ease of programming and implementation,
    but are costly to implement and it makes a machine slower.

### Distributed-Memory Multicomputers and Networks

-   The interconnection network supports *message passing* rather than
    reading and writing.
-   The processors communicate by sending and receiving messages.
-   *Multicomputer*: A distributed-memory multiprocessor in which the
    possessors and network are physically close to each other.
-   *Network system*: A distributed-memory multiprocessor in which nodes
    are connected by a local area communication network.

Applications and Programming Styles
-----------------------------------

-   A multithreaded software system manages multiple independent
    activities such as:
    -   Window systems or personal computers on workstations
    -   Time-shared and multiprocessor OS
    -   Real-time systems that control power plants, spacecraft, and so
        on.
-   Concurrent programming applications:
    -   *Iterative parallelism*: When a program has several, often
        identical processes, where each process is an iterative program.
    -   *Recursive parallelism*: When a program has one or more
        recursive procedures and the procedure calls are independent
    -   *Producers and consumers*: Communication processes, often
        organized into a pipeline through which information flow. Each
        process in a pipeline is a filter that consumes the output of
        its predecessor and produces output for its successor.
    -   *Clients and servers*: The dominant interaction pattern in
        distributed systems.
    -   *Interactive peers*: Occurs in distributed programs when there
        are several processes that execute basically the same code and
        that exchange messages to accomplish a task.

Iterative Parallelism: Matrix Multiplication
--------------------------------------------

Summary of Programming Notation
-------------------------------

### Declarations

### Sequential Statements

### Concurrent Statements, Processes,and Procedures

### Comments

Processes and Synchronization
=============================

States, Actions, Histories, and Properties
------------------------------------------

-   A concurrent program begins execution in some initial state. Each
    process in the program executes independently, and as it executes it
    examines and alters the program state
-   *Atomic action*: Actions that invisibly examine or change the
    program state
-   *Critical sections*: Mutual executions is concerned with combining
    atomic actions that are implemented directly by hardware into
    sequences of actions called critical sections.
-   *Safety property*: The program never enters a bad state
-   *Liveness property*: The program eventually enters a good state
-   *Partial correctness*: If the final state is correct, assuming that
    the program terminates (safety property)
-   *Termination*: A program terminates if every loop and procedure call
    terminates (liveness property)
-   *Total correctness*: Combined partial correctness and termination.
    If a program always terminates with a correct answer.

Parallelization: Finding Patterns in a File
-------------------------------------------

-   By using "while inside a co" the processes are created only once,
    rather than on each loop iteration.
    -   Have to use two buffers

Synchronization: The Maximum of an Array
----------------------------------------

-   Synchronization is required to get correct answers whenever
    processes both read and write shared variables.
-   Angle brackets are used to specify actions that are to be atomic
-   The technique of double checking before updating a shared variable
    is quite useful.

Atomic Actions and Await Statements
-----------------------------------

### Fine-Grained Atomicity

-   *Fine-Grained Atomic Action*: Is implemented directly by the
    hardware on which a concurrent program executes.

		```C++
        // No critical references
        int x = 0, y = 0;
        co
        x = x+1; || y = y+1;
        oc;

        // One critical references
        int x = 0, y = 0;
        co
        x = y+1; || y = y+1;
        oc;

        // Not At-Most-Once-Property
        int x = 0, y = 0;
        co
        x = y+1; || y = x+1;
        oc;
		```

### Specifying Synchronization: The Await Statement

-   Atomic actions is specified by angle brackets `<>`

-   `await` statement specifies synchronization

-   To specify only mutual exclusion: `<S;>` where *S* is a sequence

        `<x = x+1; y = y+1;>`

-   To specify only condition synchronization: `<await (B);>` where
    *(B)* specifies a delayed condition

        `<await (count > 0);>`

Producer/Consumer Synchronization
---------------------------------

	```C++
    // Copying an array from a producer to a consumer
    int buf, p = 0, c = 0;

    process Producer {
      int a[n]
      while (p < n) {
        <await (p == c);>
        buf = a[p];
        p = p+1;
      }
    }

    process Consumer {
      int b[n];
      while (c < n) {
        <await (p > c);>
          b[c] = buf;
          c = c+1;
      }
    }
	```

-   When synchronization is implemented this way, a process is said to
    be *busy*, *waiting* or *spinning*.

Techniques for Avoiding Interference
------------------------------------

-   Four basic techniques for avoiding interference.

### Disjoint Variables

-   The critical variables are those in assertions.

-   IF the write set of one process is disjoint from the reference set
    of a second, and vice versa, then the two processes cannot
    interfere.
		
        ```C++
		co x = x+1; || y = y+1; oc
		```

    -   If both x and y are initially 0
			
			```C++
            {x == 0} x = x+1; {x == 1}
            {y == 0} y = y+1; {y == 1}
			```

### Weakened Assertions

-   We can sometimes avoid interference by weakening assertions to take
    into account the effects of concurrent execution

    ```C++
    {x == 0}
    co
    {x == 0 || x == 2}
    <x = x+1;>
    {x == 1 || x == 3}
    ||
    {x == 0 || x == 1}
    <x = x+2;>
    {x == 2 || x == 3}
    oc
    {x == 3}
    ```

### Global Invariants

-   We can avoid interference by empolying a global invariant to capture
    the relations between shared variables.

### Synchronization

-   It's sufficient to consider only whether the entire sequence of
    statements might cause interference.

Safety and Liveness Properties
------------------------------

### Proving Safety Properties

-   *BAD*: Predicate that characterizes a bad program state. The program
    satisfies the associated safety property if BAD is false in every
    state in every possible history of the program.
-   *GOOD*: Equivalent to BAD.

### Scheduling Policies and Fairness

-   Most liveness properties depend on *fairness*
    -   Concerned with guaranteeing that processes get the same chance
        to proceed, regardless of what other processes do.
-   *Scheduling policy*: determines which one will be executed first.
-   Three degrees of fairness that a scheduling policy might provide
    -   *Unconditional Fairness*: A scheduling policy is unconditionally
        fair if every unconditional atomic action that is eligible is
        executed eventually.
    -   *Weak Fairness*: A scheduling process is weakly fair if
        -   It's unconditionally fair, and
        -   Every conditional atomic action that is eligible is executed
            eventually, assuming that its condition becomes true and
            then remains true until it is seen by the process executing
            the conditional atomic action.
    -   *Strong Fairness*: A scheduling policy is strongly fair if
        -   It's unconditionally fair, and
        -   Every condition atomic action that is eligible is executed
            eventually, assuming that its condition is infinitely often
            true.
-   *Livelock*: The program is alive, but the processes are not going
    anywhere.
